---
# vi: set tw=72 et sw=2 sts=-1 autoindent fo=troqan :
title:  "Rules for object file extraction from ELF archives"
date:   2020-01-13 12:04:48 +0100
categories: ELF
---
{% capture oracle_linker -%}
[Oracle's Linker Guide]({{ site.data.links.oracle_linker }})
{%- endcapture %}

# Rules for object file extraction from ELF archives

ELF static libraries are simply collections of relocatable object files,
plus a symbol table that maps symbols to the object file that defines
it. They are usually built using the `ar` tool.

As a general rule, when such a library is used in a link editor
invocation, the linker will not simply add all the relocatable files
from the library to the output artifact (unless we explicitly request it
to do so). Instead, it will perform selective extraction: only those
files which are required to satisfy symbol references the linker has
already seen will be used. Other files will not take part in the linking
process.

The situation is a little more complex than what the wording above may
indicate. This is mainly because there is some confusion about what a
_defined symbol_ actually is. If we refer to {{ oracle_linker }},
we'll notice that, for the purpouse of link editing, symbols may fall in
3 different classes:

* __undefined__ symbols are easy: they give the name of a symbol we want
  to refer to, but without providing a definition, so that we do not
  know were the symbol lives or its size. It is the linker's job to find
  an appropriate _definition_ for this symbol, maybe in a different
  object file. They typically arise from (but not only) global
  declarations in C files, for example this snippet:

  ```c
  extern int i_am_undefined;
  ```

  would result in an undefined symbol in the compiled relocatable file.

* __defined__ symbols are also easy: in contrast to undefined symbols,
  they provide a complete definition for a symbol, including its
  position within an relocatable object file (or in memory, for
  executables and shared objects) and its size. Among other things, they
  are generated by initialized C variables:

  ```c
  int i_am_defined = 1;
  ```

* __tentative__ symbols are more complex: they are ideally somewhere
  halfway between undefined and defined symbols. They don't come with a
  position into the file; instead, they provide an _alignment
  constraint_. They basically declare: "I don't care were you put this
  symbol within the program, but wherever it ends, its address must be a
  multiple of the alignment I provide". For example, a tentative symbol
  with an alignment of 4 may be allocated into the final executable so
  that it is loaded in memory at address 0x100000, but not 0x100001.

  The basic idea is that, at the end of linking, if a certain symbol
  name has only been seen as a tentative symbol (plus any undefined
  symbols), the tentative one gets defined somewhere by the linker.
  Since tentative symbols are intended to be initialized with 0, they
  usually end up into the BSS, to avoid wasting precious bytes from the
  data section.

  Conversely, if the linker finds a defined symbol with the same name
  somewhere in a different object file, the tentative definition is
  ignored and the defined symbol replaces it.

  There is also a special case covering what happens if the linker sees
  multiple homonymous tentative symbols but with different sizes: it
  retains the symbol with the larger size.

  The primary source of tentative symbols are uninitialized C globals:

  ```c
  int i_am_tentative;
  ```

  This apparently odd behaviour can be used to define the same symbol in
  multiple object file and automatically have the linker merge them
  instead of spitting out an error about multiple defined symbols:
  multiple tentative symbols do not clash among themselves or against
  defined symbols. Within ELF relocatable files, they are represented as
  symbols defined in the special `SHN_COMMON` section; for this, they
  are also called COMMON symbols.

Symbols also have _binding_, which may be either _weak_ or _global_
(_local_ binding is not considered, as local symbols cannot be used
outside their own object file and thus do not pertain to linking).
Global symbols have higher priority that weak symbols, so if the linker
must choose between a weak and a global symbol, it will choose the
latter. Also, weak symbols get special treatment when static libraries
are involved: no file is extracted from a library if its only use would
be satisfying a weak symbol.

I have noticed that _weak tentative_ symbols are somewhat a mysterious
entity. In fact, it seems that compilers refuse to emit them.  Consider
a simple global undefined C variable like this:

```c
int foo;
```

If we compile a file containing just this definition and read its symbol
table, we get:

    7: 0000000000000004     4 OBJECT  GLOBAL DEFAULT  COM foo

Which is perfectly fine, as our tentative C definition produced a COMMON
global symbol, whose section index is `SHN_COMMON`. Now, let's try again
with:

```c
#pragma weak foo
int foo;
```

This time we get:

    7: 0000000000000000     4 OBJECT  WEAK   DEFAULT    3 foo

What? The symbol ended up into a real section, so clearly this is not a
common symbol. If we take a look at the sections we find:

    [ 3] .bss              NOBITS           0000000000000000  00000040
    0000000000000004  0000000000000000  WA       0     0     4

So the symbol actually ended up into the BSS. This was to be expected,
since undefined globals in C are initialized to 0 and storing them into
the BSS saves space. However, we may have expected a symbol with weak
binding and `SHN_COMMON` section index. This is not the case. The
resulting symbol is undistinguishable from a zero-initialized C global
variable. So, when we talk about _weak tentative_ symbols in the rest of
this article, we should remember that such symbols are technically
equivalent to weak defined symbols.

Now back to static libraries. What makes the documentation ambiguous is
that it uses the expression "defined symbol" in a somewhat unclear way.
Given the 3 classes above, one would says that only the first class
is actually being referred. Conversely, when talking about "undefined
symbols" or "symbol references", one would think only the second class
is involved. This leaves tentative definitions behind and does not
clarify the behaviour that applies to them. Here I want to clarify the
exact behaviour.

It is interesting to see what happens exactly when we throw a static
library into a linking operation in which a relocatable file has already
mentioned a symbol, which also appears in one of the library's object
files: will it be extracted or not?

Basically, we have a link command like this:

    ld -o a.out first.o lib.a

where `lib.a` holds a file `second.o`, and both `first.o` and `second.o`
mention a symbol with the same name.

In the discussion that follow, `ld` refers to GNU `ld`. While it is just
an implementation of an ELF linker, it is widespread enough that it can
be used to check what actually happens in some corner cases. I also test
`gold`, which is also shipped alongside the GNU binutils. The versions
used for the tests are:

    $ LANG=C ld -v
    GNU ld (GNU Binutils) 2.33.1
    $ LANG=C ld.gold -v
    GNU gold (GNU Binutils 2.33.1) 1.16

I have tried matching all symbol cases (weak/global
undefined/tentative/defined) in the relocatable file against all symbol
cases in the archive. This is what happened:

* if the symbol in `first.o` symbol is weak, `second.o` is not extracted
  from the archive. This not only means, as clearly stated in the
  documents above, that weak undefined references are never used to pull
  files from archives. It also means that defined symbols in archives
  will never take precedence over tentative symbols in relocatable
  files, something that would have happened had `second.o` been passed
  directly to the linker. Also, tentative symbols are never merged in
  this case, so if `second.o` contained a tentative definition larger
  than a tentative definition in `first.o`, there would be no merging.
  Again, this is contrary to what happens when linking relocatable files
  directly.
* if the symbol in `first.o` is undefined (and, because of the previous
  point, it has global binding) `second.o` is extracted from the archive
  if it provides a tentative or defined symbol. The binding of the symbol
  in the archived file is irrelevant.
* if the symbol in `first.o` is tentative (and, again, has global
  binding), `second.o` is pulled only if its symbol is defined and has
  global binding. `gold` does not extract the file in this case.

The following table details the description above by listing every case:

{% include my/elf_ar_extract.html %}
